FOREWORD VIKTOR FRANKL'S Man's Search for Meaning is one of
the great books of our time. Typically, if a book
has one passage, one idea with the power to change
a person's life, that alone justiɹes reading it, rereading it,
and ɹnding room for it on one's shelves.
This book has several such passages. It is ɹrst of
all a book about survival. Like so many German and
East European Jews who thought themselves secure in the 1930s,
Frankl was cast into the Nazi network of concentration and
extermination camps. Miraculously, he survived, in the biblical phrase "a
brand plucked from the ɹre." But his account in this
book is less about his travails, what he suʃered and
lost, than it is about the sources of his strength
to survive. Several times in the course of the book,
Frankl approvingly quotes the words of Nietzsche: "He who has
a Why to live for can bear almost any How."
He describes poignantly those prisoners who gave up on life,
who had lost all hope for a future and were
inevitably the ɹrst to die. They died less from lack
of food or medicine than from lack of hope, lack
of something to live for. By contrast, Frankl kept himself
alive and kept hope alive by summoning up thoughts of
his wife and the prospect of seeing her again, and
by dreaming at one point of lecturing after the war
about the psychological lessons to be learned from the Auschwitz
experience. Clearly, many prisoners who desperately wanted to live did
die, some from disease, some in the crematoria.
But Frankl's concern is less with the question of why
most died than it is with the question of why
anyone at all survived. Terrible as it was, his experience
in Auschwitz reinforced what was already one of his key
ideas: Life is not primarily a quest for pleasure, as
Freud believed, or a quest for power, as Alfred Adler
taught, but a quest for meaning. The greatest task for
any person is to ɹnd meaning in his or her
life. Frankl saw three possible sources for meaning:
in work (doing something signiɹcant), in love (caring for another
person), and in courage during diʃcult times. Suʃering in and
of itself is meaningless; we give our suʃering meaning by
the way in which we respond to it.
At one point, Frankl writes that a person "may remain
brave, digniɹed and unselɹsh, or in the bitter ɹght for
self-preservation he may forget his human dignity and become no
more than an animal." He concedes that only a few
prisoners of the Nazis were able to do the former,
"but even one such example is suʃcient proof that man's
inner strength may raise him above his outward fate." Finally,
Frankl's most enduring insight, one that I have called on
often in my own life and in countless counseling situations:
Forces beyond your control can take away everything you possess
except one thing, your freedom to choose how you will
respond to the situation. You cannot control what happens to
you in life, but you can always control what you
will feel and do about what happens to you.
There is a scene in Arthur Miller's play Incident at
Vichy in which an upper-middle-class professional man appears before the
Nazi authority that has occupied his town and shows his
credentials: his university degrees, his letters of reference from prominent
citizens, and so on. The Nazi asks him, "Is that
everything you have?" The man nods. The Nazi throws it
all in the wastebasket and tells him: "Good, now you
have nothing." The man, whose self-esteem had always depended on
the respect of others, is emotionally destroyed. Frankl would have
argued that we are never left with nothing as long
as we retain the freedom to choose how we will
respond. My own congregational experience has shown me the truth
of Frankl's insights. I have known successful businessmen who, upon
retirement, lost all zest for life. Their work had given
their lives meaning. Often it was the only thing that
had given their lives meaning and, without it, they spent
day after day sitting at home, depressed, "with nothing to
do." I have known people who rose to the challenge
of enduring the most terrible aʀictions and situations as long
as they believed there was a point to their suʃering.
Whether it was a family milestone they wanted to live
long enough to share or the prospect of doctors ɹnding
a cure by studying their illness, having a Why to
live for enabled them to bear the How.
And my own experience echoes Frankl's in another way.
Just as the ideas in my book When Bad Things
Happen to Good People gained power and credibility because they
were oʃered in the context of my struggle to understand
the illness and death of our son, Frankl's doctrine of
logotherapy, curing the soul by leading it to find meaning
in life, gains credibility against the background of his anguish
in Auschwitz. The last half of the book without the
ɹrst would be far less effective. I ɹnd it signiɹcant
that the Foreword to the 1962 edition of Man's Search
for Meaning was written by a prominent psychologist, Dr.
Gordon Allport, and the Foreword to this new edition is
written by a clergyman. We have come to recognize that
this is a profoundly religious book. It insists that life
is meaningful and that we must learn to see life
as meaningful despite our circumstances. It emphasizes that there is
an ultimate purpose to life. And in its original version,
before a postscript was added, it concluded with one of
the most religious sentences written in the twentieth century:
We have come to know Man as he really is.
After all, man is that being who invented the gas
chambers of Auschwitz; however, he is also that being who
entered those gas chambers upright, with the Lord's Prayer or
the Shema Yisrael on his lips. HAROLD S.
KUSHNER Harold S. Kushner is rabbi emeritus at Temple Israel
in Natick, Massachusetts, and the author of several best-selling books,
including When Bad Things Happen to Good People, Living a
Life That Matters, and When All You've Ever Wanted Isn't
Enough. PREFACE TO THE 1992 EDITION THIS BOOK HAS NOW
LIVED TO SEE nearly one hundred printings in English-in addition
to having been published in twenty-one other languages.
And the English editions alone have sold more than three
million copies. These are the dry facts, and they may
well be the reason why reporters of American newspapers and
particularly of American TV stations more often than not start
their interviews, after listing these facts, by exclaiming:
"Dr. Frankl, your book has become a true bestseller-how do
you feel about such a success?" Whereupon I react by
reporting that in the ɹrst place I do not at
all see in the bestseller status of my book an
achievement and accomplishment on my part but rather an expression
of the misery of our time: if hundreds of thousands
of people reach out for a book whose very title
promises to deal with the question of a meaning to
life, it must be a question that burns under their
fingernails. To be sure, something else may have contributed to
the impact of the book: its second, theoretical part ("Logother-
apy in a Nutshell") boils down, as it were, to
the lesson one may distill from the ɹrst part, the
autobiographical account ("Experiences in a Concentration Camp"), whereas Part One
serves as the existential validation of my theories.
Thus, both parts mutually support their credibility. I had none
of this in mind when I wrote the book in
1945. And I did so within nine successive days and
with the ɹrm determination that the book should be published
anonymously. In fact, the ɹrst printing of the original German
version does not show my name on the cover, though
at the last moment, just before the book's initial publication,
I did ɹnally give in to my friends who had
urged me to let it be published with my name
at least on the title page. At ɹrst, however, it
had been written with the absolute conviction that, as an
anonymous opus, it could never earn its author literary fame.
I had wanted simply to convey to the reader by
way of a concrete example that life holds a potential
meaning under any conditions, even the most miserable ones.
And I thought that if the point were demonstrated in
a situation as extreme as that in a concentration camp,
my book might gain a hearing. I therefore felt responsible
for writing down what I had gone through, for I
thought it might be helpful to people who are prone
to despair. And so it is both strange and remarkable
to me that-among some dozens of books I have authored-precisely
this one, which I had intended to be published anonymously
so that it could never build up any reputation on
the part of the author, did become a success.
Again and again I therefore admonish my students both in
Europe and in America: "Don't aim at success-the more you
aim at it and make it a target, the more
you are going to miss it. For success, like happiness,
cannot be pursued; it must ensue, and it only does
so as the unintended side-eʃect of one's dedication to a
cause greater than oneself or as the by-product of one's
surrender to a person other than oneself. Happiness must happen,
and the same holds for success: you have to let
it happen by not caring about it. I want you
to listen to what your conscience commands you to do
and go on to carry it out to the best
of your knowledge. Then you will live to see that
in the long run-in the long run, I say!-success will
follow you precisely because you had forgotten to think of
it." The reader may ask me why I did not
try to escape what was in store for me after
Hitler had occupied Austria. Let me answer by recalling the
following story. Shortly before the United States entered World War
II, I received an invitation to come to the American
Consulate in Vienna to pick up my immigration visa.
My old parents were overjoyed because they expected that I
would soon be allowed to leave Austria. I suddenly hesitated,
however. The question beset me: could I really aʃord to
leave my parents alone to face their fate, to be
sent, sooner or later, to a concentration camp, or even
to a socalled extermination camp? Where did my responsibility lie?
Should I foster my brain child, logotherapy, by emigrating to
fertile soil where I could write my books?
Or should I concentrate on my duties as a real
child, the child of my parents who had to do
whatever he could to protect them? I pondered the problem
this way and that but could not arrive at a
solution; this was the type of dilemma that made one
wish for "a hint from Heaven," as the phrase goes.
It was then that I noticed a piece of marble
lying on a table at home. When I asked my
father about it, he explained that he had found it
on the site where the National Socialists had burned down
the largest Viennese synagogue. He had taken the piece home
because it was a part of the tablets on which
the Ten Commandments were inscribed. One gilded Hebrew letter was
engraved on the piece; my father explained that this letter
stood for one of the Commandments. Eagerly I asked, "Which
one is it?" He answered, "Honor thy father and thy
mother that thy days may be long upon the land."
At that moment I decided to stay with my father
and my mother upon the land, and to let the
American visa lapse. VIKTOR E. FRANKL Vienna, 1992 I EXPERIENCES
IN A CONCENTRATION CAMP THIS BOOK DOES NOT CLAIM TO
BE an account of facts and events but of personal
experiences, experiences which millions of prisoners have suʃered time and
again. It is the inside story of a concentration camp,
told by one of its survivors. This tale is not
concerned with the great horrors, which have already been described
often enough (though less often believed), but with the multitude
of small torments. In other words, it will try to
answer this question: How was everyday life in a concentration
camp reɻected in the mind of the average prisoner?
Most of the events described here did not take place
in the large and famous camps, but in the small
ones where most of the real extermination took place.
This story is not about the suʃering and death of
great heroes and martyrs, nor is it about the prominent
Capos-prisoners who acted as trustees, having special privilegesor well-known prisoners.
Thus it is not so much concerned with the suʃerings
of the mighty, but with the sacriɹces, the cruciɹxion and
the deaths of the great army of unknown and unrecorded
victims. It was these common prisoners, who bore no distinguishing
marks on their sleeves, whom the Capos really despised.
While these ordinary prisoners had little or nothing to eat,
the Capos were never hungry; in fact many of the
Capos fared better in the camp than they had in
their entire lives. Often they were harder on the prisoners
than were the guards, and beat them more cruelly than
the SS men did. These Capos, of course, were chosen
only from those prisoners whose characters promised to make them
suitable for such procedures, and if they did not comply
with what was expected of them, they were immediately demoted.
They soon became much like the SS men and the
camp wardens and may be judged on a similar psychological
basis. It is easy for the outsider to get the
wrong conception of camp life, a conception mingled with sentiment
and pity. Little does he know of the hard ɹght
for existence which raged among the prisoners. This was an
unrelenting struggle for daily bread and for life itself, for
one's own sake or for that of a good friend.
Let us take the case of a transport which was
oʃcially announced to transfer a certain number of prisoners to
another camp; but it was a fairly safe guess that
its ɹnal destination would be the gas chambers.
A selection of sick or feeble prisoners incapable of work
would be sent to one of the big central camps
which were ɹtted with gas chambers and crematoriums.
The selection process was the signal for a free ɹght
among all the prisoners, or of group against group.
All that mattered was that one's own name and that
of one's friend were crossed oʃ the list of victims,
though everyone knew that for each man saved another victim
had to be found. A deɹnite number of prisoners had
to go with each transport. It did not really matter
which, since each of them was nothing but a number.
On their admission to the camp (at least this was
the method in Auschwitz) all their documents had been taken
from them, together with their other possessions. Each prisoner, therefore,
had had an opportunity to claim a ɹctitious name or
profession; and for various reasons many did this.
The authorities were interested only in the captives' numbers.
These numbers were often tattooed on their skin, and also
had to be sewn to a certain spot on the
trousers, jacket, or coat. Any guard who wanted to make
a charge against a prisoner just glanced at his number
(and how we dreaded such glances!); he never asked for
his name. To return to the convoy about to depart.
There was neither time nor desire to consider moral or
ethical issues. Every man was controlled by one thought only:
to keep himself alive for the family waiting for him
at home, and to save his friends. With no hesitation,
therefore, he would arrange for another prisoner, another "number," to
take his place in the transport. As I have already
mentioned, the process of selecting Capos was a negative one;
only the most brutal of the prisoners were chosen for
this job (although there were some happy exceptions).
But apart from the selection of Capos which was undertaken
by the SS, there was a sort of self-selecting process
going on the whole time among all of the prisoners.
On the average, only those prisoners could keep alive who,
after years of trekking from camp to camp, had lost
all scruples in their ɹght for existence; they were prepared
to use every means, honest and otherwise, even brutal force,
theft, and betrayal of their friends, in order to save
themselves. We who have come back, by the aid of
many lucky chances or miracles-whatever one may choose to call
them-we know: the best of us did not return.
Many factual accounts about concentration camps are already on record.
Here, facts will be signiɹcant only as far as they
are part of a man's experiences. It is the exact
nature of these experiences that the following essay will attempt
to describe. For those who have been inmates in a
camp, it will attempt to explain their experiences in the
light of present-day knowledge. And for those who have never
been inside, it may help them to comprehend, and above
all to understand, the experiences of that only too small
percentage of prisoners who survived and who now ɹnd life
very diʃcult. These former prisoners often say, "We dislike talking
about our experiences. No explanations are needed for those who
have been inside, and the others will understand neither how
we felt then nor how we feel now." To attempt
a methodical presentation of the subject is very diʃcult, as
psychology requires a certain scientiɹc detachment. But does a man
who makes his observations while he himself is a prisoner
possess the necessary detachment? Such detachment is granted to the
outsider, but he is too far removed to make any
statements of real value. Only the man inside knows.
His judgments may not be objective; his evaluations may be
out of proportion. This is inevitable. An attempt must be
made to avoid any personal bias, and that is the
real diʃculty of a book of this kind.
At times it will be necessary to have the courage
to tell of very intimate experiences. I had intended to
write this book anonymously, using my prison number only.
But when the manuscript was completed, I saw that as
an anonymous publication it would lose half its value, and
that I must have the courage to state my convictions
openly. I therefore refrained from deleting any of the passages,
in spite of an intense dislike of exhibitionism.
I shall leave it to others to distill the contents
of this book into dry theories. These might become a
contribution to the psychology of prison life, which was investigated
after the First World War, and which acquainted us with
the syndrome of "barbed wire sickness." We are indebted to
the Second World War for enriching our knowledge of the
"psychopathology of the masses" (if I may quote a variation
of the well-known phrase and title of a book by
LeBon), for the war gave us the war of nerves
and it gave us the concentration camp. As this story
is about my experiences as an ordinary prisoner, it is
important that I mention, not without pride, that I was
not employed as a psychiatrist in camp, or even as
a doctor, except for the last few weeks.
A few of my colleagues were lucky enough to be
employed in poorly heated ɹrst-aid posts applying bandages made of
scraps of waste paper. But I was Number 119,104, and
most of the time I was digging and laying tracks
for railway lines. At one time, my job was to
dig a tunnel, without help, for a water main under
a road. This feat did not go unrewarded;
just before Christmas 1944, I was presented with a gift
of so-called "premium coupons." These were issued by the construction
ɹrm to which we were practically sold as slaves:
the ɹrm paid the camp authorities a ɹxed price per
day, per prisoner. The coupons cost the ɹrm ɹfty pfennigs
each and could be exchanged for six cigarettes, often weeks
later, although they sometimes lost their validity. I became the
proud owner of a token worth twelve cigarettes.
But more important, the cigarettes could be exchanged for twelve
soups, and twelve soups were often a very real respite
from starvation. The privilege of actually smoking cigarettes was reserved
for the Capo, who had his assured quota of weekly
coupons; or possibly for a prisoner who worked as a
foreman in a warehouse or workshop and received a few
cigarettes in exchange for doing dangerous jobs. The only exceptions
to this were those who had lost the will to
live and wanted to "enjoy" their last days.
Thus, when we saw a comrade smoking his own cigarettes,
we knew he had given up faith in his strength
to carry on, and, once lost, the will to live
seldom returned. When one examines the vast amount of material
which has been amassed as the result of many prisoners'
observations and experiences, three phases of the inmate's mental reactions
to camp life become apparent: the period following his admission;
the period when he is well entrenched in camp routine;
and the period following his release and liberation.
The symptom that characterizes the ɹrst phase is shock.
Under certain conditions shock may even precede the prisoner's formal
admission to the camp. I shall give as an example
the circumstances of my own admission. Fifteen hundred persons had
been traveling by train for several days and nights:
there were eighty people in each coach. All had to
lie on top of their luggage, the few remnants of
their personal possessions. The carriages were so full that only
the top parts of the windows were free to let
in the grey of dawn. Everyone expected the train to
head for some munitions factory, in which we would be
employed as forced labor. We did not know whether we
were still in Silesia or already in Poland.
The engine's whistle had an uncanny sound, like a cry
for help sent out in commiseration for the unhappy load
which it was destined to lead into perdition.
Then the train shunted, obviously nearing a main station.
Suddenly a cry broke from the ranks of the anxious
passengers, "There is a sign, Auschwitz!" Everyone's heart missed a
beat at that moment. Auschwitz-the very name stood for all
that was horrible: gas chambers, crematoriums, massacres. Slowly, almost hesitatingly,
the train moved on as if it wanted to spare
its passengers the dreadful realization as long as possible:
Auschwitz! With the progressive dawn, the outlines of an immense
camp became visible: long stretches of several rows of barbed
wire fences; watch towers; searchlights; and long columns of ragged
human ɹgures, grey in the greyness of dawn, trekking along
the straight desolate roads, to what destination we did not
know. There were isolated shouts and whistles of command.
We did not know their meaning. My imagination led me
to see gallows with people dangling on them.
I was horriɹed, but this was just as well, because
step by step we had to become accustomed to a
terrible and immense horror. Eventually we moved into the station.
The initial silence was interrupted by shouted commands.
We were to hear those rough, shrill tones from then
on, over and over again in all the camps.
Their sound was almost like the last cry of a
victim, and yet there was a diʃerence. It had a
rasping hoarseness, as if it came from the throat of
a man who had to keep shouting like that, a
man who was being murdered again and again.
The carriage doors were ɻung open and a small detachment
of prisoners stormed inside. They wore striped uniforms, their heads
were shaved, but they looked well fed. They spoke in
every possible European tongue, and all with a certain amount
of humor, which sounded grotesque under the circumstances.
Like a drowning man clutching a straw, my inborn optimism
(which has often controlled my feelings even in the most
desperate situations) clung to this thought: These prisoners look quite
well, they seem to be in good spirits and even
laugh. Who knows? I might manage to share their favorable
position. In psychiatry there is a certain condition known as
"delusion of reprieve." The condemned man, immediately before his execution,
gets the illusion that he might be reprieved at the
very last minute. We, too, clung to shreds of hope
and believed to the last moment that it would not
be so bad. Just the sight of the red cheeks
and round faces of those prisoners was a great encouragement.
Little did we know then that they formed a specially
chosen elite, who for years had been the receiving squad
for new transports as they rolled into the station day
after day. They took charge of the new arrivals and
their luggage, including scarce items and smuggled jewelry.
Auschwitz must have been a strange spot in this Europe
of the last years of the war. There must have
been unique treasures of gold and silver, platinum and diamonds,
not only in the huge storehouses but also in the
hands of the SS. Fifteen hundred captives were cooped up
in a shed built to accommodate probably two hundred at
the most. We were cold and hungry and there was
not enough room for everyone to squat on the bare
ground, let alone to lie down. One ɹve-ounce piece of
bread was our only food in four days.
Yet I heard the senior prisoners in charge of the
shed bargain with one member of the receiving party about
a tie-pin made of platinum and diamonds. Most of the
proɹts would eventually be traded for liquor-schnapps. I do not
remember any more just how many thousands of marks were
needed to purchase the quantity of schnapps required for a
"gay evening," but I do know that those long-term prisoners
needed schnapps. Under such conditions, who could blame them for
trying to dope themselves? There was another group of prisoners
who got liquor supplied in almost unlimited quantities by the
SS: these were the men who were employed in the
gas chambers and crematoriums, and who knew very well that
one day they would be relieved by a new shift
of men, and that they would have to leave their
enforced role of executioner and become victims themselves.
Nearly everyone in our transport lived under the illusion that
he would be reprieved, that everything would yet be well.
We did not realize the meaning behind the scene that
was to follow presently. We were told to leave our
luggage in the train and to fall into two lines-women
on one side, men on the other-in order to ɹle
past a senior SS oʃcer. Surprisingly enough, I had the
courage to hide my haversack under my coat.
My line ɹled past the oʃcer, man by man.
I realized that it would be dangerous if the oʃcer
spotted my bag. He would at least knock me down;
I knew that from previous experience. Instinctively, I straightened on
approaching the oʃcer, so that he would not notice my
heavy load. Then I was face to face with him.
He was a tall man who looked slim and ɹt
in his spotless uniform. What a contrast to us, who
were untidy and grimy after our long journey!
He had assumed an attitude of careless ease, supporting his
right elbow with his left hand. His right hand was
lifted, and with the foreɹnger of that hand he pointed
very leisurely to the right or to the left.
None of us had the slightest idea of the sinister
meaning behind that little movement of a man's ɹnger, pointing
now to the right and now to the left, but
far more frequently to the left. It was my turn.
Somebody whispered to me that to be sent to the
right side would mean work, the way to the left
being for the sick and those incapable of work, who
would be sent to a special camp. I just waited
for things to take their course, the ɹrst of many
such times to come. My haversack weighed me down a
bit to the left, but I made an eʃort to
walk upright. The SS man looked me over, appeared to
hesitate, then put both his hands on my shoulders.
I tried very hard to look smart, and he turned
my shoulders very slowly until I faced right, and I
moved over to that side. The signiɹcance of the ɹnger
game was explained to us in the evening.
It was the ɹrst selection, the ɹrst verdict made on
our existence or non-existence. For the great majority of our
transport, about 90 percent, it meant death. Their sentence was
carried out within the next few hours. Those who were
sent to the left were marched from the station straight
to the crematorium. This building, as I was told by
someone who worked there, had the word "bath" written over
its doors in several European languages. On entering, each prisoner
was handed a piece of soap, and then-but mercifully I
do not need to describe the events which followed.
Many accounts have been written about this horror.
We who were saved, the minority of our transport, found
out the truth in the evening. I inquired from prisoners
who had been there for some time where my colleague
and friend P-- had been sent. "Was he sent to
the left side?" "Yes," I replied. "Then you can see
him there," I was told. "Where?" A hand pointed to
the chimney a few hundred yards oʃ,